INTRODUCTION
CHAPTER 14
Anthropology of Food
14.1 Food as a Material Artiact
14.2 A Biocultural Approach to Food
14.3 Food and Cultural Identity
14.4 The Globalization o Food
The study o ood has a long history in anthropology and weaves together various subelds
o the discipline. Among other things, ood connects to nutrition and health, rituals and behaviors regarding
production and consumption, and worldwide trade networks and the related diusion o plants, animals, and
artiacts. Distinguishing between what is and what is not ood is a major concern within and across most
human cultures. Food varies not only rom one society to another but also across genders, classes, amily
groups, and seasons. As both a source o sustenance or the body and a means o establishing or advertising
one’s social status, ood plays a major role in personal and cultural identity. In globalized Western culture,
people regularly eat oods that originated in other cultures—such as sushi, gyros, tacos, spaghetti, and crepes,
to name just a ew—but practices such as avoiding certain oods (ood prohibitions) and even eating one’s
Figure 14.1
A ruit and vegetable vendor in Saigon, Vietnam. How many o these oods do you recognize? (credit:
“Vietnam Sept 2012 3432 Market, Sa Dec, Viet Nam” by Lynda/lickr, CC BY 2.0)
CHAPTER OUTLINE

amily members or enemies (orms o cannibalism) are cross-cultural ood traditions that are likely less
amiliar.
Culturally appropriate preparation and consumption o ood requires a vast array o knowledge, artiacts, and
rituals. In Figure 14.2, an Indigenous woman in Mexico is making tortillas, using a grinder and grindstone to
transorm corn into four, which she then mixes with water to create a batter. Preparing four in this traditional
manner typically requires the cook to navigate various stages o ood preparation, including choosing the best
dried grains, nuts, spices, or herbs; assessing when a four has reached the desired consistency; and physically
being able to use the grindstone. The ood utensils that the woman is using are not only tools but also symbols
associated with the women who own and use them. Within amilies, these utensils may be passed down
through generations. In some cultures, it is common or Indigenous women to inherit the grindstones o their
mothers and grandmothers.
FIGURE 14.2
A woman in Puerto Vallarta, Mexico, makes tortillas. In the oreground are the metate (the large, lat
stone) and the mano (the smaller, oblong stone) she used to grind dried corn into lour to create the batter or this
traditional ood. (credit: “Grinding Corn or Tortillas” by Terri Bateman/lickr, CC BY 2.0)
14.1 Food as a Material Artiact
LEARNING OUTCOMES
By the end o this section, you will be able to:
•
Describe archaeological evidence o ood.
•
Identiy some o the earliest stone tools associated with ood preparation.
•
Explain ways that archaeologists identiy early human oods.
•
Explain the relationship between archaeology and oodways research.
•
Discuss the relationship between ood and cultural heritage.
Food Artiacts
The study o early human diets is important in understanding the evolution o the human species. The size and
shape o our skulls and teeth are directly linked with culture and diet. As oods became soter over time
(primarily due to the use o re and cooking) and meat became more common in the human diet, the size o
human dentition decreased. Along with this reduction in the size o teeth, cooked oods, especially meats,
made increased calories and nutrition available and also prompted brain growth. The most direct evidence o
meat eating among early humans is butcher marks ound on bone, estimated to be rom as early as 3.4–2.6
million years ago (Wild 2019; Pobiner 2013). The earliest evidence o humans cooking a carbohydrate source
is charred tubers recently identied by archaeologist Cynthia Larbey (Wild 2019) at Blombos Cave, in the
Klasies River site in South Arica, and dated to 120,000 BP. Excavations at the archaeological site Shubayqa 1
in Jordan have uncovered the earliest evidence o charred breadcrumbs, indicating that humans were baking
432
14 • Anthropology o Food
Access or ree at openstax.org

bread as early as 14,500 BP (Richter and Arranz-Otaegui 2018). From meat to potatoes to bread, humans and
their diets have adapted to changing ways o lie.
In the archaeological record, ood evidence takes many orms. It may be a hearth or pottery container with
ood or drink residue, butchered animal bones, coprolites (ossilized ecal material), tools used in ood
processing, baskets or pottery used or storing ood, or even garbage dumps or shell middens (large
collections o discarded shells.) In historical sites, there may even be preserved ood remains, such as corn
kernels or alcoholic beverages still enclosed in containers. Studying ood helps anthropologists better
understand many aspects o human existence and culture, including the rhythms and activities o daily lie,
ood exchange and preparation, easting, ritual activities, population density, length o settlement at a site,
division o labor, seasonal activities, diet and health, cultural traditions and preerences, and even social status
within a group. Food is connected with almost all human activities.
Early Archaeological Sites and Food Utensils
By the emergence o Homo habilis around 2.6 million years ago, early human settlements were typically
littered with the debris o stone tools that were most likely used in ood production. There is evidence o tools
that were used or hunting, skinning, crushing, slicing, and grinding. These earliest tools were chipped and
faked rom pieces o stone to create objects that had both an edge and a point. As tools evolved and became
more specialized, they became increasingly ocused on specic aspects o ood procurement and production.
Unortunately, relatively little study has been done on tool production and its relationship to ood preparation.
Historically, utensils and ood preparation have received little attention in scholarly research, likely because
daily ood preparation is part o domestic work, requently associated with women, and oten occurring as a
private household activity. As archaeologists have somewhat recently turned their attention to the evolution o
ood production tools, they have begun to note interesting regional cultural patterns. Recent studies o
grinding tools in the Near East, where cereal production rst emerged, have called attention to “untapped
potential in the understanding o ood production” (Ebeling and Rowan 2004, 115).
Archaeologist Jennie Ebeling and her colleague Yorke Rowan have studied the evolution o grinding stones in
the Near East rom the Upper Paleolithic period (38,000–8000 BCE) into the Iron Age (1200–1000 BCE). Using
a diverse collection o evidence, including excavated artiacts and archaeological sites, tomb paintings, written
sources, and even ethnographic studies, they have ormed a better understanding o the role o stone grinding
tools in ancient Near Eastern ood production. The earliest stone grinding tools were o two basic types: an
earlier orm consisting o mortars, deep concave bowl-like suraces, paired with pestles, small oblong-shaped
hand grinders (see Figure 14.3); and a later orm that eatured hand stones and grinding slabs (see Figure
14.4). Using residue studies, the chemical analysis o small amounts o materials let intact on suraces,
Ebeling and Rowan’determined that both types o grinding tools were used or not only nuts and cereals but
also meat, bark, minerals, salt, and herbs. In some cases, they have been able to determine the origins o the
grinding materials, which include locally sourced stone and much-sought-ater basalt, a rugged igneous rock
that resists the type o degradation that would leave small fakes o debris in the meal.
Ebeling and Rowan's study o grinding tools revealed a great deal about lie in the Near East. By the emergence
o the Neolithic Period around 10,000 BCE, some stone tools were beginning to be decorated with distinct
geometric patterns and ashioned with pedestaled eet, developments in art and adornment that likely indicate
emerging dierences in social status between amilies. Dental and skeletal studies shed urther light on the
use o these tools. Dental decay accelerated during the Neolithic Period, suggesting increased consumption o
carbohydrates such as cereal grains, which convert to sugar during the digestive process. Additionally, skeletal
wear patterns (specically compressed toes, which distort the alignment o the oot) are evident on the
remains o women and young girls, most likely indicating that emales were doing extensive daily work
grinding cereals.
14.1 • Food as a Material Artiact
433

FIGURE 14.3
Mortars and pestles were some o the earliest stone grinding tools. (credit: Bugil/Wikimedia
Commons, Public Domain)
Ancient Foodways and Food Reconstructions
Anthropologists are interested in oodways, a term used to describe a society’s collection, production, and
consumption o ood. There is a particular interest in understanding how culinary traditions shape identity. It
is not uncommon or archaeologists and cultural anthropologists to attempt to reconstruct ood practices o
the cultures they are studying, utilizing dierent types o clues. While written accounts, artwork, and visible
ood remnants help tell the story o a culture’s oodways, anthropologists also use residue studies o traces o
ood and drink in pottery, baskets, and gourds and stable isotope analysis o human bones and teeth, in which
they measure isotopes (radioactive elements ound naturally in ood) to determine the diet o an individual
and the environment in which they lived. These clues to ancient oodways can reveal a great deal about daily
lie.
Archaeologist Lisa Duy has studied ancient Maya cuisine using residue rom pottery and grinding stones.
Residues include many kinds o trace materials let behind on the artiacts, such as charred remains on the
sides o a cooking pot or microscopic plant or animal remains on the surace o a vessel. So ar, residues have
been successully recovered rom seven ancient Maya sites across Guatemala and Belize, some dating rom as
early as 600 BCE. Some o the chemicals that have been identied indicate use o chili pepper, cacao,
chocolate, and tobacco, among other herbs and spices. While chocolate compounds have been ound on
culinary artiacts rom many dierent social strata, most other residues are specically associated with
certain social classes. Through studies such as this, oodways help scientists better understand the social
dierences and liestyles o early cultures.
FIGURE 14.4
The Maya used chocolate as an important ingredient in their diets and grew cacao as a domesticated
434
14 • Anthropology o Food
Access or ree at openstax.org

crop. To make chocolate, seeds rom cacao trees are ermented, dried, roasted, and ground into a paste. The
grinding slab pictured here was traditionally used or the grinding stage in chocolate production. (credit: (let)
“Making Chocolate Mayan Style Ixcacao Maya Belizean Chocolate Farm San Felipe Belize 2653” by bobistraveling/
lickr, CC BY 2.0; (right) “History o Chocolate, 1150 BC to 1550 AD, Olmec & Maya” by Gary Lee Todd/lickr, CC BY
2.0)
Foodways can also be explored by reconstituting oods in order to better understand their chemical and
sensual characteristics. In one experiment, physicist Seamus Blackley and his colleagues, archaeologist
Serena Love and microbiologist Richard Bowman, developed a technique to extract hibernating yeast
microbes let behind on porous Egyptian ceramics. These yeast microbes were dated to 4,500 years ago. The
rst step in their experiment was to sequence the yeast’s genome (i.e., map each o its genetic markers),
through which they determined that it was not genetically the same as modern yeast and that it was as old as
they had originally thought. The researchers then ed the yeast einkorn four, made rom a kind o wheat that
would have existed at the time the yeast was originally active. As Blackley reported, “The yeast woke up right
away.... It was kind o remarkable” (Blackley, Love, and Bowman 2019). The resulting bread was ne grained
and well risen, with a pungent odor o brown sugar. Using experimental techniques such as these,
archaeologists are able to tap into smells, tastes, and textures that were part o ancient oodways and may no
longer exist in our cuisine today.
Food as Cultural Heritage
Sometimes, anthropologists nd it useul to distinguish between the terms culture—which, as discussed in
Chapter 3, The Concept o Culture, can be dened as belies, behaviors, and artiacts that a group uses to adapt
to its environment—and cultural heritage, which comprises traditions passed down or generations and used
as a way o identiying a group o people. In state societies peopled by diverse cultural groups, it is common or
ood to be used to distinguish one group rom another. “Those people” eat “those things,” and “my people” eat
“these things.” Later in this chapter, we will examine how national identities are shaped by ood, but ethnic
groups also dene themselves by dierences in ood choices and ood preparation. Within American culture,
there are a number o amiliar connections between certain groups and certain oods: the Pacic Northwest
Coast Indigenous peoples and salmon; Jewish residents o New York City and bagels; people o German
ancestry in Milwaukee, Wisconsin, and brats; residents o San Francisco’s Chinatown and steamed pork
buns—to name just a ew.
While archaeologists are at work using various techniques to better understand the oodways o ancient
cultures, some contemporary peoples are ocused on reviving their own culinary heritages. Reviving and
restoring seeds, recipes, and even early cooking techniques are part o learning more about earlier
populations, diverse oodways, and traditional and perhaps once-lost favors. For some people, this
rediscovery is also a way o asserting or reclaiming their cultural identity.
Cherokee Ramps
Early studies o the oodways o the Eastern Band o Cherokee mention the prevalence o ramps, wild leeks that
are similar to wild onions and grow in the Appalachian region o the United States. Ramps (Allium tricoccum)
are eaten rom the time they begin to sprout in March almost until they bloom in April or May. The bulb is
eaten raw or is chopped up and ried with eggs. Some parboil the entire plant, and in recent years, ramps have
been canned or deep-rozen by some Cherokee amilies. (White 1975, 324–325)
Used as a supplementary ood by the Cherokee or generations and eventually adopted by European settlers in
the Appalachians, ramps today continue to serve as a link to cultural identity. In his ethnographic research on
the Eastern Band o the Cherokee Nation, anthropologist Max White (1975) explained that the Cherokee view
plants as having agency, the ability to make choices about where to grow and whether to intervene to help
people. The Cherokee cultivate relationships o respect with the native fora around them as part o an
enduring relationship with their environment.
14.1 • Food as a Material Artiact
435

FIGURE 14.5
Ramps, wild leeks that are similar to wild onions, have long been an important part o Cherokee
oodways. They are now increasingly in demand or urban cuisine as well. (credit: “Patch o Ramps” by Wendell
Smith/lickr, CC BY 2.0)
Ramps, long valued as one o the rst edible green plants to ripen in the spring, are prized by many people or
their favor and reported medicinal value or treating common colds, earaches, and circulatory disease (Rivers,
Oliver, and Resler 2014, 7). Cherokee citizen and anthropologist Courtney Lewis (2012) has studied the recent
legal and ethical issues surrounding the collection o ramps in the Qualla Boundary, U.S.-designated Cherokee
land in North Carolina. Because the Great Smoky Mountains National Park (GSMNP) borders the western part
o the Qualla Boundary, there had been a long-standing inormal agreement allowing Cherokee citizens to
collect traditional oods within the park as long as their collection did not endanger any species. Up until 2009,
the relationship between the National Park Service (NPS) and the Eastern Band o Cherokee had been
primarily amicable. However, in 2007, the NPS had decided to prohibit all harvesting o ramps within the
GSMNP, based on an earlier study by an NPS botanist that warned that unregulated oraging could endanger
some plant species. They began issuing citations in 2009, and on March 22 o that year, the NPS arrested a
Cherokee amily that was harvesting ramps, supposedly within park boundaries.
During the trial, there were many inconsistencies in the testimony and misunderstandings between the
various parties, with the court oten privileging Western scientic knowledge over Indigenous knowledge
(Lewis 2012, 110). Cherokee scholars and elders pointed out that ramp production is cyclical, consisting o
high production years ollowed by recovery cycles; that Indigenous harvesting techniques, which take just the
stems and leaves instead o the roots, are dierent rom those o non-Indigenous harvesters and allow or
sustainable growth; and that many o the less productive ramp areas were not within traditional Cherokee
oraging zones. Many o the zones in which ramps were deemed most threatened were outside o the
traditional oraging areas and were most likely being harvested by non-Indigenous people meeting the
demand or ramps in nearby upscale restaurants. In addition, given the increasing levels o air pollution and
ongoing climate change, many wild plants in the Great Smoky Mountains are acing threats rom sources other
than local oraging. Although the trial ended with the Cherokee amily charged or trespassing on ederal
lands, the legalities o ramp collection continue to be debated today.
While the controversies surrounding ramp collection have not completely subsided, there is increasing
recognition o the importance o Indigenous oodways and cultural identity. Today, around 50 percent o U.S.
national parks, including the Great Smoky Mountains National Park, allow some orm o oraging within their
boundaries (Linnekin 2019), regulated by all sorts o rules, guidelines, and inormal agreements with local and
Indigenous populations. The Eastern Band o the Cherokee Nation monitors ramps as part o its natural
resource management in the Qualla Boundary and continues to negotiate or oraging rights on ancestral lands
that the Cherokee deem to have belonged to them or thousands o years, now cut o by the national park. For
436
14 • Anthropology o Food
Access or ree at openstax.org

many Cherokee amilies, oraging sites and trails are amily secrets that have been passed down or many
generations. In 2019, the GSMNP entered into a new agreement with the Eastern Band o Cherokee to allow its
citizens to gather sochan, a kale-like plant located within park boundaries (Chávez 2019). Today, Cherokee still
gather ramps within park boundaries in designated areas, but those gathering or non-subsistence needs are
required to have a gathering permit issued by the GSMNP.
There are many examples o oods and dishes that are considered important to preserving ancestral identities.
In 2006, UNESCO, the educational and cultural group o the United Nations, convened a working group to
establish lists o intangible cultural heritage and a register o good saeguarding practices
(https://openstax.org/r/ich.unesco) as a way to recognize and preserve the cultural traditions o humanity.
Several special oods and cooking traditions are included on the lists as examples o endangered cultural
heritage, such as fattened sourdough bread rom Malta, oshi palav (a pila made with vegetables, rice, and
meat) rom Tajikistan, and the cultivation o the date palm in Bahrain, Jordan, Kuwait, and other areas o the
Middle East.
It is not uncommon or a amily to have special recipes and meals that they serve on holiday occasions as a way
o remembering their past and o passing on traditions to new generations. Does your amily ollow any ood
traditions as a way o remembering your ancestors? Take a moment to consider the dierent roles that ood
plays in your own amily.
14.2 A Biocultural Approach to Food
LEARNING OUTCOMES
By the end o this section, you will be able to:
•
Identiy a biocultural approach.
•
Describe Three Sisters cropping as an Indigenous adaptation.
•
Identiy the various types o evidence that anthropologists use to reconstruct ancient oodways.
•
Describe how contemporary dietary approaches connect with ancient oodways.
Food and the Biocultural Approach
Many anthropologists take a biocultural approach to their study o ood, looking at how ood plays both a
cultural and a biological role in human lives. Food provides physical nourishment o our bodies and also a
means o understanding who we are. How people procure and prepare oods and which oods are deemed
appropriate or which occasions are important parts o cultural identity. Food is thus an area that weaves
together the biological and cognitive aspects o our lives—an observation captured by the amiliar phrase “you
are what you eat.” Although the biocultural approach continues to ocus on ood and identity, it also includes
an emphasis on the nutritional science o ood.
The biocultural approach can be applied to the study o ood in many ways, rom research into subsistence
practices and traditional ways o raising crops to analysis o how groups assign meaning to the ood o other
cultures. As popular cultural artiacts, ood-related knowledge and practices are shared rom culture to culture
as groups seek additional health benets and ood variety.
Subsistence and Biocultural Adaptation
Cereals (including corn, wheat, barley, and rice) and legumes (various types o beans) are the most common
crops grown by subsistence armers because they are versatile and economical and have a wide range o
health benets. In addition to carbohydrates, protein, vitamins, minerals, and ber, they provide a substantial
number o calories. In other words, cereals are a good investment o labor and have long-term health benets.
Indigenous peoples around the world have long been aware o the potential in these oods.
By the time Europeans arrived in the Americas, Indigenous peoples o North and Central America had been
selectively breeding domesticated plants or thousands o years. Over many generations, the Indigenous
peoples o the Americas had developed a detailed understanding o the health benets and the risks
associated with certain plants and the ways in which plants could be grown together to sustain higher yields.
The “Three Sisters” is one traditional cropping system that grows specic plants near one another—usually
14.2 • A Biocultural Approach to Food
437

some combination o corn, beans, and squash—so that each aids and supports the others’ growth. This
approach o placing plants o dierent types together in such a way as to benet the growth o each is known as
intercropping. While variations on the Three Sisters are ound throughout Indigenous groups in North and
Central America, the Haudenosaunee’s use o the practice has been particularly well studied.
The Haudenosaunee people (also known as the Iroquois or Six Nations) o what is now the northern part o
New York State practiced Three Sisters cultivation with maize, beans, and pumpkins, which are a orm o
squash. Seeds rom each o these crops were planted together in small mounds in an unplowed eld. Each
mound contained several maize seeds in the middle, with bean and pumpkin seeds placed around the
perimeter. (Note the dierence rom the row-based agriculture practiced on conventional American arms
today.) Each o the plants in the mound oers a benet to the others. The vigorous pumpkin vines, with their
large leaves, quickly orm a canopy that shades out weeds, preserves moisture in the soil, and prevents
erosion. The bean plants, with the help o bacteria, are able to x nitrogen in the soil, making it available as a
ertilizer to the plants growing around them. And the ast-growing maize plants, which require lots o nitrogen
or healthy growth, provide trellises or the climbing beans (Gish Hill 2020). In a 1910 study o Haudenosaunee
culture, Arthur Parker, archaeologist and Iroquois historian, noted that these crops were planted together in
part because the Haudenosaunee people believed they were “guarded by three inseparable spirits and would
not thrive apart” (quoted in Mt. Pleasant 2016, 88). In the Haudenosaunee belie system, these three crops
were believed to have been given to the people as gits rom the deities. The physical and spiritual sustenance
provided by each ood reminded the people o their cultural heritage each time they were consumed (Carnegie
Museum o Natural History 2018). Although these oods were oundational to their diets, the Haudenosaunee
added to the diversity o their cuisine through seasonal oraging o wild plants and animals.
Jane Mt. Pleasant (2016), a horticulturist and specialist in Indigenous cropping systems, has studied the
caloric yield (the total calories provided by the harvest) o crops planted using the Three Sisters technique. She
has ound that when planted together, the three crops yield as much as two to our times the amount o total
calories and protein than they would i the plants were cultivated alone. Corn plants in particular show a
signicant increase in protein when combined with the other sisters (92).
FIGURE 14.6
A Three Sisters garden usually includes corn, beans, and squash planted together in a small mound.
The plants nourish and protect each other as they grow. Here, gardeners display a bountiul harvest rom their Three
Sisters garden. (credit: “IMG_4326” by Sterling College/lickr, CC BY 2.0)
Today, sustainable arming techniques are increasingly valued by people concerned about the ecological costs
o conventional arming. Sustainable arming techniques, many o them grounded in traditional practices,
oer ways to produce higher ood yields, reduce ertilizer costs, build healthier soils, and avoid genetically
modied plants, which have had their DNA deliberately altered in a laboratory setting. Iowa State University
currently sponsors a Three Sisters gardening project (https://openstax.org/r/threesistersproject), which works
collaboratively with Native American communities to raise awareness o the techniques, nutritional benets,
and cultural values o traditional intercropping methods. The project makes a point o working with heirloom
438
14 • Anthropology o Food
Access or ree at openstax.org

seed varieties, which are seeds that are not genetically modied, are open pollinated (meaning that the seeds
can be saved or generations and will continue to breed true), and have been in existence or at least 50 years.
One o their goals is to return the seeds to their home communities (Gish Hill 2020). There are many benets
to using heirloom seeds, including better favors, better adaptation to local environmental conditions, the
ability to save seeds to be grown in subsequent years, and increased genetic diversity, which contributes to
long-term sustainability.
Increasingly, there is increased interest in new oods and cuisine worldwide. Many o these rediscovered oods
originate in the histories o Indigenous cultures. Using oral tradition, historical documents, and even genetic
analyses, both Western and non-Western peoples are increasingly seeking to revive culinary heritage:
Many Indigenous people are now on a path o rediscovery, preservation, and reinvention o these
staple oods. The Three Sisters are experiencing a culinary resurgence ater decades o lost knowledge
due to orced relocation, cultural oppression, and genocide. Numerous tribes have ound renewed
health and spiritual bonds through eorts to sustain, cultivate, and cook with the Three Sisters.
(Murphy 2018)
Food, Fads, Diets, and Health
In the th century BCE, the Greek historian Herodotus wrote about the Macrobians, a cultural group living in
what is now southern Ethiopia who were supposed to have ound a mythical “ountain o youth” in which
people could bathe and become young again. Herodotus had heard that the Macrobians lived to be 120 years
old and consumed only boiled sh and milk. Trying to explain the myths he had heard, he surmised that diet
and special waters must have been the cause o their longevity. While this was not likely the rst time that
someone claimed a secret elixir or remedy or physical aging and illness, it is one o the earliest recorded
dietary myths. Many more would ollow. In 1558, Venetian patron o the arts Alvise Cornaro authored a best
seller titled Discorsi della vita sobria, variously translated into English as Sure and Certain Methods o
Attaining a Long and Healthul Lie and Discourses on a Sober and Temperate Lie, among other titles. In this
text, he makes the ollowing claims about human health:
This sobriety is reduced to two things, quality, and quantity. The rst, namely quality, consists in
nothing, but not eating ood, or drinking wines, prejudicial to the stomach. The second, which is
quantity, consists in not eating or drinking more than the stomach can easily digest; which quantity
and quality every man should be a perect judge o by the time he is orty, or ty, or sixty; and,
whoever observes these two rules, may be said to live a regular and sober lie. This is o so much virtue
and ecacy, that the humours o such a man’s body become most homogeneous, harmonious, and
perect; and, when thus improved, are no longer liable to be corrupted or disturbed by any other
disorders whatsoever. (Cornaro 1779, under “A Compendium o a Sober Lie”)
History oers a long line o pseudoscientists, tonic peddlers, tinkerers, and even some thoughtul people
hawking medicinal potions and diets reputed to solve every imaginable health problem. Many contained
ingredients that are now widely recognized as harmul. In the late 19th century, a concerned consumer could
try Mrs. Winslow’s Soothing Syrup or teething children, which contained morphine and alcohol; Cocaine
Toothache Drops; or a cocaine-inused wine called Vin Mariani, which was used in Europe or depression,
malaria, and loss o appetite (Mitchell 2019).
New religious or philosophical movements were oten associated with new diets intended to improve both
physical and moral health. In the United States, the Graham diet enjoyed a period o popularity in the 19th
century. The diet revolved around the consumption o graham, a four made o the whole-wheat berry,
including the bran covering. It was developed in the 1830s by Sylvester Graham, an evangelical minister
touted by Ralph Waldo Emerson as the “prophet o bran bread” (Lobel 2012). Advertised as a remedy or sexual
desire and gluttony, Graham’s diet included various elements that constitute sound dietary advice even today:
eat only two meals a day, and eat in moderation; use no spices, meat, alcohol, or tobacco; and consume lots o
ruits, vegetables, and whole grains, including lots o graham. This diet became wildly popular in the
mid-1800s, with religious groups such as the Shakers, the Christian Scientists, and the Seventh Day Adventists
supporting aspects o this diet. Today, Sylvester Graham’s contribution to the American diet is still evident in
the graham cracker.
14.2 • A Biocultural Approach to Food
439

When the World Health Organization (WHO) was established in 1948, it undamentally changed the way people
think about health and diet. Compiling comparative data on health and liestyle rom around the world, the
WHO engendered a greater awareness o health disparities between populations and a rising interest in the
link between health and liestyle. Noting that both chronic disease rates and average lie spans varied greatly
among cultural and national groups, people began to make connections between diet and health. Perhaps
there was something to be learned rom societies in which people enjoyed longer lives and had lower rates o
chronic illnesses such as heart disease and diabetes. And so began a prolieration o healthy diets. Two o the
most noteworthy today are the Mediterranean diet and the paleo diet.
FIGURE 14.7
The Mediterranean diet relies on ruits, vegetables, and olive oil, with very limited amounts o meat
or saturated ats. This “Mediterranean Salad” is light and nutritious. (credit: “Mediterranean Salad / Ensalada
Valenciana” by Lablascovegmenu/Wikimedia Commons, CC BY 2.0)
The Mediterranean diet is based on long-held dietary traditions in countries bordering the Mediterranean Sea.
It was rst presented ormally as a healthier way o eating by U.S. physiologist and nutritionist Ancel Keys at a
WHO meeting in Geneva, Switzerland, in 1955. Keys described the particular culinary practices ound in the
Mediterranean region and noted their related health benets. These practices include high consumption o
ruits, vegetables, and olive oil and low consumption o meats and saturated ats. Today, the Mediterranean
diet is still recommended or improving cardiovascular health and blood cholesterol levels. In a recent study o
26,000 women (Ahmad et al. 2018), data showed that the risk o developing cardiovascular disease was 25
percent lower over 12 years among those ollowing the Mediterranean diet (The Nutrition Source 2018).
Near Eastern archaeologist Oded Borowski (2004) has researched the origins and history o the Mediterranean
diet. Textual sources, especially biblical texts, and an array o archaeological artiacts rom across the region
describe traditional oodways in the Middle East very similar to those still prevalent today—a diet consisting
primarily o cereal grains, herbs, ruit, bread, oil, and sh, with occasional meat. Archaeological artiacts also
point to a great deal o dietary continuity in this part o the world. Food processing and subsistence tools such
as grinding stones, churns, nets, shhooks, and sinkers; storage jars with ood residues o substances such as
grain, yeast, and wine; middens with preserved ood remains in ancient garbage; and animal ossils o a
variety o reshwater and saltwater sh all indicate the long historical trajectory o and cultural preerence or
these oods. This culinary tradition continues today throughout the Mediterranean area, including the Middle
East, North Arica, and southern Europe (notably Italy and Greece).
440
14 • Anthropology o Food
Access or ree at openstax.org

FIGURE 14.8
The paleo diet is based on contemporary ideas o how our hunting and gathering ancestors might
have eaten. It includes lean meats, ruits, vegetables, and nuts. Here, the meat kabobs are lying on a bed o
vegetables. (credit: “IMG_0308.JPG” by Michael Arrington/lickr, CC BY 2.0)
Another very popular diet today, based partially on cultural and nutritional studies, is the paleo diet,
sometimes called the Paleolithic diet, the caveman diet, or the Stone Age diet. This diet was rst developed in
the 1970s by gastroenterologist Walter Voegtlin, who argued that our bodies (and our digestive systems) have
been evolutionarily designed or a hunting-and-gathering way o lie. The paleo diet is made up o oods that
are traditionally associated with this hunting-and-gathering liestyle—ruits, vegetables, lean meats, sh, nuts,
and seeds. The Mayo Clinic, one o the best-known US medical research centers, describes the paleo diet in
this way:
The aim o a paleo diet is to return to a way o eating that’s more like what early humans ate. The diet’s
reasoning is that the human body is genetically mismatched to the modern diet that emerged with
arming practices—an idea known as the discordance hypothesis. (Mayo Clinic Sta 2020, under
“Purpose”)
Biological anthropologists have done signicant research on the oodways o Paleolithic-era people across
dierent geographical areas. A great deal can be determined about what these early people likely ate using
various means. Among these means are zooarchaeology (the study o the ossilized remains o animals),
human anatomy and physiological studies, ethnographic studies o contemporary hunters and gatherers, and
analysis o artiacts, coprolites (ossilized eces), and human skeletal and dental remains. Although there
seems to have been a great deal o dierence in the specic types o vegetables, ruits, meats, and sh that
were eaten in various cultures, in general, Paleolithic diets and liestyles were marked by low levels o at
consumption; high levels o ood diversity, including some raw oods; and high levels o physical activity. Not
all the paleo diets in circulation today ollow these same guidelines. While anthropological research indicates
that the actual Paleolithic diet likely consisted o 65 percent plant-based oods and 35 percent animal-based
oods, many contemporary paleo recipes and prescriptions do not ollow this ormula strictly (Chang and
Nowell 2016). In their research on the paleo diet, biological anthropologist Melanie Chang and Paleolithic
archaeologist April Nowell encourage anthropologists to become more involved in current conversations about
Paleolithic liestyles and what they might suggest about a healthy human diet. There is, perhaps, still more we
can learn about the real paleo diet.
Regardless o our contemporary diet practices, we can learn a lot rom our ancestors. Their oodways,
liestyles, and traditional knowledge oer windows into both the evolution o our bodies and ways o eating
that promote health and longevity. The inormation oered by anthropology’s study o dierent cultures and
historical periods can supplement our own knowledge base as we seek ways to improve our lives today.
14.2 • A Biocultural Approach to Food
441

PROFILES IN ANTHROPOLOGY
George Armelagos
1936-2014
Personal History: Born in Detroit, Michigan, George Armelagos (https://openstax.org/r/armelagos-george)
earned his BA in anthropology rom the University o Michigan and his MA and PhD rom the University o
Colorado Boulder. During his career, he taught at the University o Utah, the University o Massachusetts, the
University o Florida, and nally at Emory University, where he was a distinguished proessor o anthropology.
Area o Anthropology: Armelagos took a biocultural approach to understanding ancient human diseases,
examining skeletal remains to reconstruct how human behavior intersected with disease and nutrition in
early populations. His areas o ocus were wide ranging and included nutritional anthropology, disease in
human evolution, race and racism, skeletal biology, and medical anthropology. He was a pioneer o
paleopathology, the study o ancient human disease. His research also extended into contemporary oodways
and nutrition. His book Consuming Passions: The Anthropology o Eating (1980), which he coauthored with
Peter Farb, was one o the rst anthropology texts devoted wholly to the study o ood. Armelagos also had an
abiding interest in cooking and was a master che who loved entertaining his riends.
Accomplishments in the Field and Importance o His Work: Armelagos’s contributions to anthropology
bridge the subelds o biological, archaeological, and cultural anthropology. He was also an accomplished
proessor who taught and mentored students throughout his career and even ater retirement. He received
numerous awards or research and service, including the Viking Fund Medal or distinguished research in
physical anthropology, awarded by the Wenner-Gren Foundation or Anthropological Research in 2005. In
2008, he was awarded the Franz Boas Award or Exemplary Service to Anthropology by the American
Anthropological Association. This annual award recognizes extraordinary achievements that have served the
anthropological proession and the community beyond by applying anthropological knowledge to improve
lives. In 2009, Armelagos was awarded the Charles R. Darwin Lietime Achievement Award in the subeld o
biological anthropology. His research and mentorship advanced the biological and cultural study o our
species.
14.3 Food and Cultural Identity
LEARNING OUTCOMES
By the end o this section, you will be able to:
•
Describe the relationship between ood and cultural identity.
•
Contrast ood prescriptions with ood proscriptions.
•
Illustrate the connection between ood and gender.
Food and Cultural Identity
Food travels across cultures perhaps more oten and with more ease than any other tradition. Sometimes ood
carries with it related culinary practices (such as the use o chopsticks), and sometimes oods mix with
existing culinary traditions to orm new syncretic cuisines (such as Tex-Mex ood, which evolved rom a
combination o Mexican and US Southwest ood traditions). Like culture itsel, oods are shared within and
move between communities, adapting to changing circumstances and settings. Although it is adaptable, ood is
also tightly linked to people’s cultural identities, or the ways they dene and distinguish themselves rom
other groups o people. As part o these cultural identities, the term cuisine is used to reer to specic cultural
traditions o cooking, preparing, and consuming ood. While urban areas tend to shit and adapt cuisine more
requently than rural areas, those aspects o cuisine most tightly linked to identity tend to change slowly in all
settings.
442
14 • Anthropology o Food
Access or ree at openstax.org

FIGURE 14.9
Japanese short-grain rice plays an important role in Japanese identity. Here, short-grain rice is
served with a bee curry. (credit: Ocdp/Wikimedia Commons, Public Domain)
In her research on Japanese ood and identity, cultural anthropologist, and Japanese scholar Emiko Ohnuki-
Tierney (1993, 1995) explores the sociocultural construction o rice as a dominant metaphor or the Japanese
people. Using evidence rom ocial decrees, taxation documents, myths, rituals, woodblock prints, and poetry,
Ohnuki-Tierney traces the long history o rice cultivation in Japan. Introduced rom China, rice agriculture
began during the Yamato period (250–710 CE). While the Chinese preerred long-grain rice, the Japanese
cultivated short-grain rice, which they considered the only pure orm o rice. During this period, a series o
myths connecting short-grain rice to Japanese deities emerged in olktales and historical
documents—evidence o Japanese eorts to distinguish themselves rom the Chinese, who also relied on rice
as an important source o calories. Over the years, rice developed into a staple crop that Japanese landowners
used as a orm o tax payment, indicating strong connections between Japanese land, Japanese short-grain
rice, and the Japanese landowning elite. By the early modern period (1603–1868), as Japan became
increasingly urban and eventually industrialized, agricultural lie declined. People moved o the land and into
cities, and rice began to take on new meanings. Symptomatic o a cultural identity strongly rooted in national
history, rice became an increasingly sacred symbol o Japanese identity—a cultural memory with a long
history that consistently tied being Japanese to eating domestic Japanese rice. As Japan opened to interactions
with Western nations, the Japanese continued to use rice as a metaphor or national identity: while the
Japanese reerred to themselves as “rice-eaters,” they reerred to Western peoples as “meat-eaters.”
For years, Japan has had a ban on importing any oreign-grown rice, even Caliornia export rice, which is
primarily the Japanese short-grain variety and available at a signicantly lower price. In 1993, Japan suered
a growing season that was colder and wetter than normal and had a low-producing rice harvest. US rice
exporters were able to negotiate a trade deal allowing some limited rice exports to Japan. Yet most o this rice
remained in warehouses, untouched. Japanese people complained that it was ull o impurities and did not
taste good. Today, on average, Japanese people consume only about 160 grams o rice daily, hal o what they
consumed 40 years ago (Coleman 2017). Yet their cultural and symbolic connection with domestic Japanese
rice remains strong. Japanese short-grain rice is still reerred to as shushoku, “the main dish” (Ohnuki-
Tierney 1993, 16)—the symbolic centerpiece, even though it is now more requently a small side dish in a more
diverse cuisine. Ohnuki-Tierney notes that rice plays a particularly important role in the Japanese sense o
community:
Not only during ritual occasions, but also in the day-to-day lives o the Japanese, rice and rice
products play a crucial role in commensal activities. Cooked white rice is oered daily to the amily
ancestral alcove. Also, rice is the only ood shared at meals, served by the emale head o the
household, while other dishes are placed in individual containers. Rice stands or “we,” i.e., whatever
social group one belongs to, as in a common expression, “to eat rom the same rice-cooking pan,”
which connotes a strong sense o ellowship arising rom sharing meals. (1995, 229)
14.3 • Food and Cultural Identity
443

Although the meaning o rice has shited during dierent historical periods—rom a comparison between
short-grain Japanese and long-grain Chinese rice to a way to distinguish rice-eating Japanese rom meat-
eating Westerners, then to a measure o the quality o what is grown in Japanese versus less desirable
imported rice—the Japanese continue to hold a cultural identity closely connected with rice. Being Japanese
means eating Japanese rice still today.
The relationship between ood and cultural identity is readily apparent in Western societies. Most grocery
stores have aisles containing goods labeled as “international oods” or “ethnic oods,” and large urban areas
oten include neighborhoods eaturing a conglomeration o restaurants serving diverse cuisines. In
Washington, DC, the neighborhood o Adams Morgan is amous or its ethnic restaurants. Walking down the
street, one might smell the mouthwatering aroma o injera, a sour, ermented fatbread rom Ethiopia, or bún
bò hu?, spicy lemongrass bee soup rom Vietnam. Think about your own town and nearby urban areas. Where
do you go to try new oods and dishes rom other cultures?
Food Prescriptions and Proscriptions
As with all cultural institutions, there are various rules and customs surrounding ood and eating. Many o
these can be classied as either ood prescriptions, oods that one should eat and are considered culturally
appropriate, or ood proscriptions, oods that are prohibited and not considered proper. These ood
regulations are social norms that connect production and consumption with the maintenance o cultural
identity through ood.
In the previous section, you read about the importance o Japanese short-grain rice as a symbol o Japanese
identity. For many Japanese people, short-grain rice is a ood prescription, something that they eel they
should eat. Food prescriptions are common across cultures and nation-states, especially in regard to special
holidays. There are many examples: turkey on Thanksgiving in the United States, corned bee on St. Patrick’s
Day in Ireland, special breads, and candy gurines on Día de los Muertos in Mexico, saron bread and ginger
biscuits on St. Lucia Day in Sweden, or mutton curry and rice on Eid al-Fitr in Muslim countries. Food
prescriptions are also common in the celebration o commemorative events, such as the cakes eaten at
birthday parties and weddings, or the enchiladas and tamales prepared or a quinceañera celebrating a young
Latin American woman’s 15th birthday. Most o these occasions involve easts, which are elaborate meals
shared among a large group o people and eaturing symbolically meaningul oods.
One interesting example is the ood eaten to mark the Dragon Boat Festival (Dragon Boat Festival, also called
Duanwu), held in China on the th day o the th month o the Chinese lunar year. There are various origin
stories or the Dragon Boat Festival. In one o them, the estival commemorates a beloved Chinese poet and
government minister named Qu Yuan (ca. 340–206 BCE), who ell out o imperial avor and died by suicide,
drowning himsel. According to the story, people threw sticky rice dumplings into the river where he had
drowned himsel in order to distract the sh so that they could retrieve his body and give him a proper burial.
The most important Dragon Boat ood is zongzi, a sticky rice dumpling with dierent llings, but the east also
traditionally includes eel, sticky rice cakes, boiled eggs, jiandui (a wheat ball covered in sesame seeds),
pancakes with llings, and wine.
444
14 • Anthropology o Food
Access or ree at openstax.org

FIGURE 14.10
Zongzi, a sticky rice dumpling, wrapped in bamboo leaves, prepared or the Dragon Boat Festival.
Festival oods are typically associated with specifc ritual events. (credit: “Dragon Boat Festival Zongzi” by Evan
Wood/lickr, CC BY 2.0)
Food proscriptions, also called ood taboos, are also common across cultures and contribute to establishing
and maintaining a group’s identity. Oten, these rules and regulations about what not to eat originate in
religious belies. Two examples are the vegetarianism practiced by many Hindus, which is grounded in the
spiritual principle o ahimsa (nonviolence in relation to all living things), and kashrut, a Jewish principle that
orbids mixing meat and dairy oods or eating pork or shellsh. Sometimes ood proscriptions are active or
limited periods o time. For many Christians, especially Catholics, the 40 days o Lent, a period o religious
refection commemorating the 40 days Jesus spent asting in the desert, are a time when people give up
certain oods or drinks to make a symbolic sacrice. For many Catholics, this means asting (withholding a
measure o ood) throughout the period and/or totally abstaining rom meat on the special days o Ash
Wednesday and Good Friday:
For members o the Latin Catholic Church, the norms on asting are obligatory rom age 18 until age
59. When asting, a person is permitted to eat one ull meal, as well as two smaller meals that together
are not equal to a ull meal. The norms concerning abstinence rom meat are binding upon members
o the Latin Catholic Church rom age 14 onwards. (United States Conerence o Catholic Bishops n.d.)
Muslims observe Ramadan, a month-long commemoration o the prophet Muhammad receiving the
revelations o the Quran, by asting every day rom sunup to sundown. The Islamic ast entails a prohibition on
ood and drink, including water. Every evening ater sundown, Muslims eat a large meal that include ruits,
vegetables, and dates to rehydrate or the next day’s ast.
Some ood prohibitions are customary and tied more to ancient cultural traditions than religion. Many ood
prohibitions pertain to meat. Among several East Arican groups, there is a prohibition against eating sh o
any kind. This is called the Cushitic sh taboo because the prohibitions are ound among many, but not all,
cultural groups whose languages are part o the Cushite amily, such as the Somali, Masaai, and Bantu peoples.
Horsemeat was historically consumed inrequently in the United States until it was outlawed in 2005,
primarily because o toxins in the meat related to the butchering process. Even beore then, horsemeat in
mainstream US society was a ood prohibition. However, it is consumed throughout Europe, where there are
butchers solely devoted to handling horsemeat.
14.3 • Food and Cultural Identity
445

FIGURE 14.11
A horse butcher shop in Italy. In many European countries, horsemeat is processed separately rom
other meats and sold at specialized butcher shops. (credit: Schellack at English Wikipedia/Wikimedia Commons, CC
BY 3.0)
An interesting case o ood rules and regulations across cultures is cannibalism, the act o eating an individual
o one’s own species. Although we do not usually think o human fesh as a menu item, in some cultures it is
considered a kind o ood, typically eaten as symbolic nutrition and identity. U.S. cultural and medical
anthropologist Beth Conklin (1995) and Brazilian cultural anthropologist Aparecida Vilaça (2002) conducted
research among the Wari’ o western Amazonia in Brazil and ound that prior to evangelization by Christian
missionaries in the 1960s, the Wari’ practiced two dierent types o cannibalism: endocannibalism, or eating
members o one’s own cultural group, and exocannibalism, or eating those who are “oreign” or outside o
one’s cultural group. Each orm o cannibalism was associated with its own belies, practices, and symbolism.
The Wari’ belie system is based on the principle that only the Wari’ are real people. All non-Wari’ others,
people and animals alike, are not humans and thus can be considered meat (Vilaça 2002, 358). When speaking
o the practice recognized by anthropologists as exocannibalism, the Wari’ did not consider themselves to be
practicing cannibalism at all; they saw non-Wari’ people as not ully human and classied them as a type o
prey. Endocannibalism was understood dierently. Endocannibalism among the Wari’ was practiced as part o
the mourning process and understood as a way o honoring a Wari’ person who had died. Following a death,
the immediate amily o the deceased arranged or non-kin and relatives by marriage to dress and prepare the
body by dismembering, roasting, and eating virtually all o it. Consuming the fesh o the deceased was
considered the ultimate act o respect, as the remains were not buried in the ground but in the living bodies o
other Wari’. Once eaten by non-amily Wari’, the deceased could transorm rom humans into spirits and
eventually return as prey animals to provide ood or the living. For Conklin, this practice indicates mutualism,
or the relationship between people and animals through the medium o ood and eating:
For Wari’, ... the magic o existence lies in the commonality o human and animal identities, in the
movements between the human and nonhuman worlds embodied in the recognition through
cannibalism o human participation in both poles o the dynamic o eating and being eaten. (Conklin
1995, 95)
Cannibalism has been associated with many cultures, sometimes accompanying warare or imperial
446
14 • Anthropology o Food
Access or ree at openstax.org

expansion, as in the case o the Aztecs (Isaac 2002), and sometimes as a means o showing respect or and
establishing kinship with the deceased (see Lindenbaum 1979 or an example in Papua New Guinea). Although
there have been scholarly arguments around the nature and requency o cannibalism (Arens 1979), there is
increasing evidence that this was a practiced norm in many human societies. Some religions also incorporate
symbolic cannibalism as a way o identiying with the deity.
Food can be deeply symbolic and plays an important role in every culture. Whether oods are prescribed or
prohibited, each culture constructs meanings around what they dene as ood and the emotional attachments
they have to what they eat. Consider your own plate when you next sit down to eat. What meanings are
attached to the dierent oods that you choose? What memories do dierent oods evoke?
Food and Gender
While ood itsel is a material substance, humans classiy and categorize oods dierently based on cultural
dierences and amily traditions. In many cultures, ood is gendered, meaning some oods or dishes are
associated with one gender more than with the other. Think about your own culture. I you were cooking a meal
or only women or only men, would that infuence the oods you chose to prepare? Although gender-specic
ood choices are stereotypes o male and emale dietary preerences and every person has their own individual
preerences, many social institutions and entertainment venues cater to gendered diets.
•
When the television show Man v. Food, a show devoted to “big ood” and eating challenges, premiered on
the Travel Channel in 2008, it had some o the highest ratings o any show on that channel. Many o the
oods showcased are those stereotypically associated with men (burgers, potatoes, ribs, ried chicken), and
the host participates in local ood-eating competitions, highlighting regional cuisines around the United
States. In this show, ood unctions as a sporting activity under extreme conditions.
•
Food delivery business GrubHub did a study o male and emale ordering preerences in 2013–2014 at
some 30,000 dierent restaurants in more than 700 US cities to “better understand takeout and delivery”
(GrubHub 2018). In their results, they noted some signicant dierences between men’s and women’s
ordering habits. Pizza was the most popular item or both men and women, but among other selections,
women tended to order more healthy options, such as salads, sushi, and vegetable dishes, and men
ordered more meat and chicken, with the most popular choices being General Tso’s chicken, chicken
parmesan, and bacon.
Food historian Paul Freedman traced the emergence o gendered oods and gendered ood stereotypes in the
United States back to the 1870s, when “shiting social norms—like the entry o women into the
workplace—gave women more opportunities to dine without men” (2019b). Freedman notes that there was a
rapid development o restaurants meant to appeal to women. Many o these eatured lighter are, such as
sandwiches and salads, and some were reerred to as “ice cream saloons,” playing on a distinction between
them and the more traditional type o saloon primarily associated with men (Freedman 2015). There was also
growth in the recipe industry to provide women with home cooking options that allowed or quicker meal
preparation.
Gendering oods, a practice oten associated with specic lie stages and rituals, is ound across cultures and
across time. In his study o marriage customs in the chiedom o Batié in Cameroon, social anthropologist
Emile Tsékénis notes that the marriage is ormalized by an exchange o gendered oods between the couple’s
polygamous amilies:
The groom oers raw “male” products (palm oil, plantain, and raa wine) to the co-wives o the girl’s
mother, while the co-wives hand over the palm oil to the girl’s ather, and the girl’s side oers “emale”
products (yams, potatoes, and/or taro) to the husband’s side. (2017, 134)
This exchange o gendered oods between amilies mirrors the marriage ceremony and symbolically binds the
couple’s amilies together.
Gendered oods are also common during puberty rituals in many cultures, especially or young women, as
emale puberty is marked by the beginning o menstruation, an obvious and observable bodily change. In the
Kinaaldá, the Navajo puberty ceremony or young girls that takes place shortly ater the rst menstruation, the
girl and emale members o her amily together cook a corn cake in a special underground oven. The corn
14.3 • Food and Cultural Identity
447

cake, called an alkaan, is understood as a re-creation o the rst corn cake baked by the Navajo deity Changing
Woman. Ater baking this rst corn cake, Changing Woman oered a piece o it to the sun in gratitude or ood
and lie. By reenacting this ritual, the young girl marks her own journey toward the creation o lie, as she is
now capable o becoming a mother.
FIGURE 14.12
Ashes smolder in a frepit in preparation or baking the corn cake that is used to celebrate a Navajo
girl’s Kinaaldá (puberty) ceremony. (credit: “Campfre 1” by Jaroslav A. Polák/lickr, Public Domain)
As we saw in Chapter 12, Gender & Sexuality, cultures may also celebrate oods that enhance sexuality. In some
regions o Vietnam, there are restaurants that serve dog to male customers only, as dog meat is believed to
enhance masculinity (Avieli 2011). Food contains and conveys many cultural belies. This can be compared to
the joys attributed to chocolate in the United States, especially during the celebration o Valentine’s Day. Do you
have similar belies about ood and sexuality?
14.4 The Globalization o Food
LEARNING OUTCOMES
By the end o this section, you will be able to:
•
Describe the impacts o globalization on ood and ood diversity.
•
Defne ood deserts and ood oases.
Globalization o Food
Most people, when they think about ood, consider it a local, individual choice based on personal preerences
and economic possibilities. But ood is a global commodity marketed by transnational corporations, health
institutes, advertising campaigns, and subtle and not-so-subtle cultural messaging through global media such
as movies, television, and online video. Most oten, what people choose to eat is based on underlying structures
that determine availability and cost. While there are now hothouse businesses growing year-round ruits and
vegetables, aordability oten prohibits everyone rom having access to resh, ripe oods. Instead, mainstream
grocery stores most oten stock oods imported across long distances. Most ruits and vegetables sold in the
grocery store were harvested unripe (and oten tasteless) so that they would last the days and weeks between
harvesting and purchase.
448
14 • Anthropology o Food
Access or ree at openstax.org

FIGURE 14.13
Pallets o ruit being loaded on deck or shipment overseas. Most commercial ruits are harvested
beore they are ripe so that they will not spoil beore arriving at a supermarket, oten ar rom where they were
picked. (credit: Dr. Karl-Heinz Hochhaus/Wikimedia Commons, CC BY 3.0)
In her work on ood and globalization, anthropologist and ood studies specialist Lynne Phillips points out the
“crooked pathways” (2006, 38) that ood takes to become a global commodity. Increasingly aected by
transnational corporations, ood today is marketed or endlessly higher prots. Food no longer goes simply
rom producer to consumer. There are many turns along the way.
Food globalization has numerous eects on our daily lives:
•
The ood chains rom producers to consumers are increasingly ragile as a small number o transnational
corporations provide the basic oods that we eat daily. Failures in this ood chain might come rom
contamination during production or breaks in the supply chain due to climate crises, taris, or trade
negotiations between countries. Our dependence on global ood chains makes the ood supply to our
communities more vulnerable to disruption and scarcity.
•
Our ood cultures are less diverse and tend to revolve around a limited number o mass-produced meats
or grains. With the loss o diversity, there is an accompanying loss not only o ood knowledge but also o
nutrition.
•
As oods become more globalized, we are increasingly dependent on ood additives to enhance the
appearance and taste o oods and to ensure their preservation during the long journey rom actory arm
to table. We are also increasingly exposed to steroids, antibiotics, and other medicines in the meat we eat.
This exposure poses health risks to large numbers o people.
•
As plants and animals are subjected to ever more sophisticated orms o genetic engineering, there is an
increasing monopoly on basic ood items, allowing transnational companies to aect regulatory controls
on ood saety. As corporate laboratories develop patented seeds (such as the Monsanto Corporation’s
genetically engineered corn) that are super-producers and able to withstand challenges such as harsh
climate conditions and disease, growers become dependent on the seed sold by these corporations. No
longer able to save seed rom year to year, growers have little choice but to pay whatever price these
corporations choose to charge or their genetic material.
•
Factory arming o all types, but especially large-scale animal arms, are major contributors to global
warming. Not only do they produce large amounts o water and air pollution and contribute to worldwide
deorestation, but as more and more orest is turned into pasture, the sheer number o livestock
contributes signicant levels o greenhouse gases that lead to global warming. Worldwide, livestock
account or around 14.5 percent o global greenhouse gas emissions (Quinton 2019).
Food has long been an international commodity, even during the 17th and 18th centuries, when traders sought
spice and trade routes connecting Europe and Asia. Today, however, ood has become transnational, with
production sometimes spanning many dierent countries and resh and processed oods moving long
14.4 • The Globalization o Food
449

distances rom their original harvest or production. Because these migrating oods must be harvested early or
packaged with preservatives that we may not know or even be able to pronounce, there has been a parallel
development in local ood movements, organic ood movements, and arm-to-table establishments as people
see the dangers o ood globalization. In the very popular The Omnivore’s Dilemma: A Natural History o Four
Meals (2006), American author and ood journalist Michael Pollan advocates that people should know the
identity o the oods they eat and should make every eort to eat locally sourced products. Shortly ater the
book’s publication, che and author Jessica Prentice coined the term locavore to reer to those who eat locally
and know the origins o their oods. In 2007, locavore was chosen as the New Oxord American Dictionary word
o the year.
Food Deserts and Oases
Worldwide, access to nutritious and aordable oods is growing increasingly unequal. Areas with inadequate
or unreliable access to nutritious oods are sometimes called ood deserts. Food deserts present serious
challenges to health and wellness in multiple ways and have been linked to eating disorders, obesity, and
malnutrition. In Western nations, ood deserts requently correspond to other areas o social inequality, such
as low-income and minority communities. Reduced availability o healthy and economical ood oten
exacerbates many o the challenges these communities ace.
FIGURE 14.14
Food deserts are common in Western countries, especially in and around urban areas. This chart
shows areas in the United States where signifcant percentages o people both have no car and no grocery store
within a mile o their home, which is about a twenty minute walk or a healthy adult. (credit: United States
Department o Agriculture and Centers or Disease Control/Wikimedia Commons, Public Domain)
As the world population continues to grow (currently at around 7.9 billion people (https://openstax.org/r/
world-population)), climate change accelerates, and ood production becomes more and more concentrated in
the hands o a ew corporations, access to ood will become increasingly critical to our survival. The story o
progress embraced by Western society tells us that globalization and agricultural developments have
stabilized and secured our ood chains, but anthropological studies o oragers suggest otherwise. Agricultural
production is tied to access to arable land, clean water, stable climate, and a reliable workorce. Periodically,
crops (and animals) ail due to disease, drought, and even disruption rom warare and extreme weather,
leading to scarcity and amine in many parts o the world. In addition, as amilies and communities produce
less and less o their own ood and become more and more dependent on intermediaries to gain access to ood,
their vulnerabilities increase. While there are many dierences between state societies and oragers, there are
valuable lessons we can learn rom them. Foragers, acing the same unstable conditions that we all ace
worldwide, have a more varied and fexible diet and are able to adjust their needs seasonally based on local
availability. They eat locally, and they adjust their needs to what is available.
There are also ood oases, areas that have high access to supermarkets and resh oods, and these are growing
in number. Some are in urban or suburban areas, and some are in rural areas where sustainable arming
supports a local community or restaurant. In Harrodsburg, Kentucky, the Trustees’ Table serves ood rom the
nearby Pleasant Hill Shaker gardens. Visitors to the Shaker site, a historic cloistered religious community,
learn about the Shaker seed industry, plant varieties, and sustainable gardening techniques at Shaker Farm,
450
14 • Anthropology o Food
Access or ree at openstax.org

then walk down to the Trustees’ Table to have a arm-to-table meal. The seasonal menu eatures local
Kentucky dishes that would have been common are during the period o Shaker occupation (1805–1910),
such as garlic potatoes, warm or cold salads, vegetable pot pies, and apple pie. By utilizing the oods raised in
the nearby gardens, the Trustees’ Table serves as a legacy restaurant that helps preserve and sustain Shaker
research and arming on-site.
In Richmond, Virginia, an organization called Real Local RVA (https://openstax.org/r/reallocalrva) was ounded
in 2014 as a grassroots local ood movement to support businesses and residential areas in the downtown area
o the city. It expresses its core value as “collaboration over competition.” The group sponsors monthly
meetings, local arm tours, and community events highlighting businesses and prominent gures in the local
ood movement. The participants are all armers, independent grocers, or local restaurants that source local
ingredients and products as part o their mission. Besides advocating or small arms and independent
businesses, Real Local RVA also sponsors workshops and education on sustainable arming, does joint
marketing and “storytelling” about its partnership and the values o local ood networks, and provide a
recognizable brand to identiy participating members or the wider urban community.
Although local ood movements are increasingly popular, most still primarily operate in more afuent areas.
As we develop more o these healthy initiatives, we also must expand the zones in which they operate,
especially in cities, to include all o our neighbors and neighborhoods. Food and sociality go hand in hand. As
Michael Pollan writes, “The shared meal elevates eating rom a mechanical process o ueling the body to a
ritual o amily and community, rom mere animal biology to an act o culture” (2008, 192).
The study o ood in anthropology is important or many reasons. Food reveals cultural identities and physical
vulnerabilities, and it helps build social networks and mark important lie events. How oten eating is
prescribed, what oods are considered appropriate, who cooks, who serves whom, and what oods are most
and least valued all vary across cultures. As anthropologists seek to understand human cultures, ood is oten a
centerpiece ingredient in knowing who we are.
MINI-FIELDWORK ACTIVITY
Food Memories
Food plays an important role in long-term memory, as it is linked to smell, taste, and texture and oten is a
central eature o social unctions, whether they be amily dinners or holiday easts. In this project, you will
interview two individuals who are likely to have dierent ood memories than you; they may be older, they may
be living in a dierent part o the country (or world), or they may have lived part o their lives in a specic
environment (rural or urban) that is dierent rom yours. Ask each person to share with you stories about
special holiday meals prepared and served as part o their amily lie, whether as a child or an adult. What
oods do they most identiy with specic holidays? How did they prepare and consume those oods? Were there
specic gender roles during the preparation and holiday meals? Ater collecting and writing up what you have
learned, what conclusions can you make about the role o ood in human social and cultural lie?
14.4 • The Globalization o Food
451

Key Terms
basalt
an igneous rock requently used or early
grinding tools in the Near East.
biocultural approach
a perspective that looks at
both the cultural and biological roles that ood
plays in human lives.
cannibalism
the act o eating an individual o one’s
own species.
cuisine
the cultural traditions o cooking and
preparing ood.
cultural heritage
traditions passed down through
generations that serve as primary characteristics
o how a group denes and identies itsel to
other cultural groups.
cultural identity
the ways in which people dene
and distinguish themselves culturally rom other
groups.
easts
elaborate meals o symbolically meaningul
oods shared among large groups o people.
ood
a substance eaten or the purpose o nutrition
and/or social status.
ood deserts
areas that lack access to nutritious
and aordable oods.
ood oases
areas that have high access to
supermarkets and resh oods.
ood prescriptions
oods that one should eat and
are considered culturally appropriate.
ood proscriptions
oods that are prohibited and
are not considered proper as ood; also called
ood taboos.
oodways
the collection, production, and
consumption o ood; how culinary traditions
shape cultural identity.
genetically modied plants
plants whose DNA has
been altered through human intervention.
heirloom seeds
seeds that are not genetically
modied, are open pollinated, and have been in
existence or at least 50 years.
intercropping
planting dierent seeds mixed
together instead o in separate rows.
locavore
a person who eats locally produced oods
and knows their origins.
residue studies
chemical analyses o small
amounts o material let intact on suraces in
order to identiy the substance.
shell midden
a large collection o discarded shells,
either ood remains or waste piles rom other
activities.
Summary
Food is a ubiquitous artiact. Found everywhere
during all periods o history, it is diverse and
symbolic. The study o early human diets is
important or understanding the evolution o
humans, and archaeologists use various kinds o
evidence to determine early oodways, rom material
artiacts such as ood utensils to ood residues and
even coprolites. The study o ancient oods provides
valuable inormation about health, economics,
politics, and religion o early humans and the ways
humans adapted to changing environments. Today,
Indigenous groups such as the Cherokee are
incorporating traditional oodways in cultural
revitalization eorts, negotiating with the
government to protect their ability to harvest wild
oods on ancestral lands.
Many anthropologists take a biocultural approach to
the study o ood, examining the biological/
nutritional role o ood and its connection to identity.
Agricultural practices such as the Three Sisters
practice o the Haudenosaunee are good examples o
ways in which human cultures have used their
knowledge about ood to develop sustainable and
healthy arming techniques. Sustainable arming
techniques, many o them grounded in traditional
practices, typically produce higher ood yields,
reduce ertilizer costs, build healthier soils, and
avoid genetically modied plants. There is also
growing interest today in cultural oodways that may
increase health and wellness, such as the
Mediterranean diet, based on ruits, vegetables, and
olive oil, and the paleo diet, which is based on our
perspective o early human diets and includes lean
meats, ruits, vegetables, and nuts.
Food plays a central role in cultural identity.
Cultures practice ood prescriptions, or specic
oods considered critical to maintaining cultural
identity, such as short-grain rice or the Japanese,
and ood proscriptions, which are ood taboos, such
as horsemeat in the United States. Feast oods are
another way in which cultures use ood to mark and
symbolize special occasions. In short, what we eat as
human societies denes who we are. Some societies,
such as the Wari’ in Brazil and many others, have
also practiced orms o cannibalism as ways o
dening kinship and humanity. Gender and religion
are other areas in which ood plays a major role in
creating boundaries and identities.
Today, many oods are global commodities. Grocery
452
14 • Key Terms
Access or ree at openstax.org

store oods, produced and distributed by
transnational corporations, may be shipped many
thousands o miles rom their points o origin.
Access to resh ood is a global challenge, especially
in urban environments with concentrated
populations. In ood deserts, multiple orms o social
inequality aect the health and wellness o the
whole society. There are also growing numbers o
ood oases, where local movements oer arm-to-
table meat and produce. Food plays an important
role in our biological and cultural lives. Given the
ongoing challenges o climate change, ood
insecurity is increasing worldwide as dependable
ood networks are shiting.
Critical Thinking Questions
1. What are the various ways in which ood can be
dened as an artiact?
2. What is the relationship between heritage oods
and cultural identity?
3. How do archaeologists study early human diets?
What evidence can they use to determine eating
habits?
4. How does ood serve as both physical and
cultural nourishment?
5. Describe various ood prescriptions and ood
prohibitions that are common in your own
cultural practices.
6. What is the relationship between ood and
gender? How might ood habits reinorce gender
stereotypes? Give some examples rom your own
cultural practices.
7. How has globalization aected the cultural
diversity and value o ood?
8. Why should ood deserts concern everyone in a
society?
Bibliography
Ahmad, Shaqat, M. Vinayaga Moorthy, Olga V. Demler, Frank B. Hu, Paul M. Ridker, Daniel I. Chasman, and
Samia Mora. 2018. “Assessment o Risk Factors and Biomarkers Associated with Risk o Cardiovascular
Disease among Women Consuming a Mediterranean Diet.” JAMA Network Open 1 (8). https://doi.org/
10.1001/jamanetworkopen.2018.5708.
Arens, William. 1979. The Man-Eating Myth: Anthropology and Anthropophagy . New York: Oxord University
Press.
Avieli, Nir. 2011. “Dog Meat Politics in a Vietnamese Town.” Ethnology 50 (1): 59–78. http://ethnology.pitt.edu/
ojs/index.php/Ethnology/article/viewArticle/6092.
Blackley, Seamus, Serena Love, and Richard Bowman. 2019. “A Conversation with the Team That Made Bread
with Ancient Egyptian Yeast.” Interview by Jenny G. Zhang. Eater. August 8, 2019. https://www.eater.com/
2019/8/8/20792134/interview-seamus-blackley-serena-love-richard-bowman-baked-bread-ancient-
egyptian-yeast.
Borowski, Oded. 2004. “Eat, Drink, and Be Merry: The Mediterranean Diet.” Near Eastern Archaeology 67 (2):
96–107.
Braun, Adee. 2014. “Looking to Quell Sexual Urges? Consider the Graham Cracker.” Atlantic , January 15, 2014.
https://www.theatlantic.com/health/archive/2014/01/looking-to-quell-sexual-urges-consider-the-graham-
cracker/282769/.
Carnegie Museum o Natural History. 2018. “The Three Sisters: Sustainers o Lie.” North South East West:
American Indians and the Natural World. https://nsew.carnegiemnh.org/iroquois-conederacy-o-the-
northeast/three_sisters/.
Chang, Melanie L., and April Nowell. 2016. “How to Make Stone Soup: Is the ‘Paleo Diet’ a Missed Opportunity
or Anthropologists?” Evolutionary Anthropology 25 (5): 228–231.
Chávez, Karen. 2019. “Great Smokies Approves Historic Sochan Collecting Agreement with Eastern Band o
Cherokee.” Citizen-Times , updated March 27, 2019. https://www.citizen-times.com/story/news/local/2019/
03/25/great-smoky-mountains-national-park-allow-cherokee-gather-sochan/3267860002/.
Coleman, Rei Kataoka. 2017. “Where Did Japan’s Imported Rice Go?” Tokyo Review. July 7, 2017.
https://www.tokyoreview.net/2017/07/where-did-japans-imported-rice-go/.
14 • Critical Thinking Questions
453

Conklin, Beth A. 1995. “‘Thus Are Our Bodies, Thus Was Our Custom’: Mortuary Cannibalism in an Amazonian
Society.” American Ethnologist 22 (1): 75–101.
Cornaro, Lewis [Alvise]. 1779. Discourses on a Sober and Temperate Lie . London: Benjamin White.
http://www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/30660.
Duy, Lisa. 2020. “Ancient Maya Cuisine and Residue Analysis.” Florida Museum o Natural History. Updated
June 29, 2020. https://www.foridamuseum.uf.edu/envarch/research/maya/residue-analysis/.
Ebeling, Jennie R., and Yorke M. Rowan. 2004. “The Archaeology o the Daily Grind: Ground Stone Tools and
Food Production in the Southern Levant.” Near Eastern Archaeology 67 (2): 108–117.
Farb, Peter, and George Armelagos. 1980. Consuming Passions: The Anthropology o Eating . Boston: Houghton
Mifin.
Freedman, Paul. 2015. “Women and Restaurants in the 19th-Century United States.” OUPblog , Oxord
University Press. March 30, 2015. https://blog.oup.com/2015/03/women-restaurants-united-states-history/.
Freedman, Paul. 2019a. American Cuisine: And How It Got This Way . New York: Liveright.
Freedman, Paul. 2019b. “How Steak Became Manly and Salads Became Feminine.” The Conversation. October
24, 2019. https://theconversation.com/how-steak-became-manly-and-salads-became-eminine-124147.
Gish Hill, Christina. 2020. “Returning Corn, Beans, and Squash to Native American Farms.” JSTOR Daily ,
JSTOR. November 24, 2020. https://daily.jstor.org/partner-post-indigenous-agriculture/.
Gra, Sarah R. 2020. “Archaeology o Cuisine and Cooking.” Annual Review o Anthropology 49:337–354.
GrubHub. 2018. Men vs. Women Eating Preerences: Online Ordering Data Reveals Gender Dierences in
Takeout Dining . https://media.grubhub.com/les/doc_downloads/GrubHub-Inc-Men-vs-Women-Eating-
Preerences-White-Paper_v001_b3cw14.pd.
Isaac, Barry L. 2002. “Cannibalism among Aztecs and Their Neighbors: Analysis o the 1577–1586 ‘Relaciones
Geográcas’ or Nueva España and Nueva Galicia Provinces.” Journal o Anthropological Research 58 (2):
203–224.
Lewis, Courtney. 2012. “The Case o the Wild Onions: The Impact o Ramps on Cherokee Rights.” Southern
Cultures 18 (2): 104–117.
Lindenbaum, Shirley. 1979. Kuru Sorcery: Disease and Danger in the New Guinea Highlands . Palo Alto, CA:
Mayeld.
Linnekin, Baylen. 2019. “Complicated Rules or Foraging Aren’t Helping Our National Parks.” Reason , April 6,
2019. https://reason.com/2019/04/06/complicated-rules-or-oraging-arent-hel/.
Lobel, Cindy. 2012. “Sylvester Graham and Antebellum Diet Reorm.” The Gilder Lehrman Institute o
American History AP US History Study Guide. July 31, 2012. http://ap.gilderlehrman.org/history-by-era/
rst-age-reorm/essays/sylvester-graham-and-antebellum-diet-reorm.
Mayo Clinic Sta. “Paleo Diet: What Is It and Why Is It So Popular?” Mayo Clinic. August 25, 2020.
https://www.mayoclinic.org/healthy-liestyle/nutrition-and-healthy-eating/in-depth/paleo-diet/
art-20111182.
Mitchell, Dawn. 2019. “The Cure or What Ails You: Elixirs, Tonics and Snake Oil.” Indy Star , updated January
4, 2019. https://www.indystar.com/story/news/history/retroindy/2019/01/03/cure-what-ails-you-elixirs-
tonics-and-snake-oil/2288353002/.
Mt. Pleasant, Jane. 2016. “Food Yields and Nutrient Analyses o the Three Sisters: A Haudenosaunee Cropping
System.” Ethnobiology Letters 7 (1): 87–98. https://doi.org/10.14237/ebl.7.1.2016.721.
Murphy, Andi. 2018. “Meet the Three Sisters Who Sustain Native America.” Native Voices , PBS. November 16,
2018. https://www.pbs.org/native-america/blogs/native-voices/meet-the-three-sisters-who-sustain-native-
america/.
454
14 • Bibliography
Access or ree at openstax.org

The Nutrition Source. 2018. “Diet Review: Mediterranean Diet.” Harvard T. H. Chan School o Public Health.
Updated December 2018. https://www.hsph.harvard.edu/nutritionsource/healthy-weight/diet-reviews/
mediterranean-diet/.
Ohnuki-Tierney, Emiko. 1993. Rice as Sel: Japanese Identities through Time . Princeton, NJ: Princeton
University Press.
Ohnuki-Tierney, Emiko. 1995. “Structure, Event and Historical Metaphor: Rice and Identities in Japanese
History.” Journal o the Royal Anthropological Institute 1 (2): 227–253.
Phillips, Lynne. 2006. “Food and Globalization.” Annual Review o Anthropology 35:37–57.
Pobiner, Briana. 2013. “Evidence or Meat-Eating by Early Humans.” Nature Education Knowledge 4 (6): 1.
https://www.nature.com/scitable/knowledge/library/evidence-or-meat-eating-by-early-
humans-103874273/.
Pollan, Michael. 2006. The Omnivore’s Dilemma: A Natural History o Four Meals . New York: Penguin Press.
Pollan, Michael. 2008. In Deense o Food: An Eater’s Maniesto . New York: Penguin Press.
Quinton, Amy. 2019. “Cows and Climate Change: Making Cattle More Sustainable.” Feeding a Growing
Population, UC Davis. June 27, 2019. https://www.ucdavis.edu/ood/news/making-cattle-more-sustainable.
Richter, Tobias, and Amaia Arranz-Otaegui. 2018. “Following a New Trail o Crumbs to Agriculture’s Origins.”
Sapiens , July 16, 2018. https://www.sapiens.org/archaeology/oldest-known-bread-crumbs-discovered/.
Rivers, Bridgette, Robert Oliver, and Lynn Resler. 2014. “Pungent Provisions: The Ramp and Appalachian
Identity.” Material Culture 46 (1): 1–24.
Robb, Alice. 2014. “Will Overpopulation and Resource Scarcity Drive Cannibalism?” New Republic , June 19,
2014. https://newrepublic.com/article/118252/cannibalism-and-overpopulation-how-amazon-tribe-ate-
their-dead.
Tsékénis, Emile. 2017. “Personhood, Collectives, and the Human-Animal Distinction: The Cases o the
Cameroon Grasselds and Madagascar.” Anthropologica 59 (1): 130–144.
United States Conerence o Catholic Bishops. n.d. “Fast and Abstinence.” Accessed September 30, 2021.
https://www.usccb.org/prayer-and-worship/liturgical-year-and-calendar/lent/catholic-inormation-on-
lenten-ast-and-abstinence.
Vilaça, Aparecida. 2002. “Making Kin out o Others in Amazonia.” Journal o the Royal Anthropological
Institute 8 (2): 347–365.
Waldstein, Anna. 2017. “Food, Anthropology O.” In The International Encyclopedia o Anthropology , edited by
Hilary Callan. John Wiley & Sons. https://doi.org/10.1002/9781118924396.wbiea1605.
White, Max E. 1975. “Contemporary Usage o Native Plant Foods by the Eastern Cherokees.” Appalachian
Journal 2 (4): 323–326.
Wild, Sarah. 2019. “Scientists Find First Evidence o Humans Cooking Starches.” Sapiens , June 21, 2019.
https://www.sapiens.org/news/starches-rst-evidence-humans-cooking/.
14 • Bibliography
455

456
14 • Bibliography
Access or ree at openstax.org
